Win A Rivian, Support Solar
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
Who wouldn’t want a Rivian electric truck or Rivian electric SUV? But … who can really afford one? Until Rivian comes out with its cheaper models, a Rivian R1T or Rivian R1S is beyond the budget of most of us. They are definitely two of the top electric vehicles on the market, with excellent software, amazing interiors, and oodles of space. They’re just too expensive. However, if you buy a raffle ticket from the latest raffle supporting the Illinois Solar Education Association (ISEA)*, you may win one of these dream vehicles.
Before we get into the details of the raffle, though, I want to highlight the important work ISEA does and why it’s an organization you should support anyway. Unfortunately, at the moment, solar power and wind power are under attack at the federal level in the USA. As a result, more than ever, we need states to take up the critical work of supporting solar, making it easier for consumers to install, and bringing more clean electricity onto the grid. ISEA does the critical work lobbying for this and raising awareness in Illinois.
As the 6th largest state in the USA in terms of population, Illinois needs to solarize to meet higher electricity demand than almost every other state, so the work ISEA is doing is really important. Support their work, and perhaps win yourself a Rivian in the process. Let’s now get to the details of that.
- $100 per ticket, or 4 for $300.
- Only 2,500 tickets will be sold.
- The raffle ends on June 21, 2025, and the winner will be drawn on June 25th.
- Raffle website with further details: https://go.rallyup.com/isea-rivian-raffle-2025
Note that ISEA has been conducting EV raffles for more than 10 years now! Clearly, it’s a good way to raise money for the organization, but I imagine it’s also important to them that it is another cleantech solution that helps to cut CO2 emissions and local air pollution.
Funny enough, the first winner of this raffle was a CleanTechnica reader who bought a ticket because of us writing about it, and I didn’t find out for a year until it was mentioned to me while working on the second year’s raffle articles!
Note that all proceeds of the raffle do directly benefit ISEA’s mission of solar advocacy and education, which is especially important given the current political opposition. We need all the help we can get now, especially at the state level, as there’s a broad and deep political campaign from fossil-financed lobbyists to slow down solar adoption in the United States.
With the right policies in place, solar power is the cheapest source of energy around. Solar and energy storage systems are also the fastest to build/install. ISEA works hard to help residents and businesses benefit from them. The organization is continuously working with policymakers to help them to understand the benefits of these technologies and why they support the economy, people’s personal finances, and human health as well as a livable climate.
As the organization itself says, “ISEA is a very small nonprofit working to make a big change! Every ticket purchased truly makes a difference.”
That’s enough for me. Supporting a great solar organization while also putting my name in the hat to potentially win a Rivian? Sign me up!
*This post was supported by ISEA.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy