Elected Officials Reject The Trump Administration’s Attacks On Solar
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
It’s a fact that fossil fuel-based energy continues to fuel the warming of the planet. With that warming comes an increased frequency of extreme weather events. The solutions to achieve carbon neutrality and energy security depend on the deployment of more renewable energy, continued energy efficiencies, and resilience measures. But actions by the current federal administration are holding back progress, while putting people and their communities at higher risk.
That’s where the organization Elected Officials to Protect America comes in. It is a network of current and former bipartisan elected officials who care deeply about protecting our planet and democracy with education on energy security solutions.
The Extreme Weather That Many Lawmakers Refuse To Acknowledge
Destructive wildfires, droughts, heat waves, extreme storms, flash floods, and infectious diseases cause economic and emotional distress.
At the Tempe Public Library complex, where solar arrays provide more than 70% of the complex’s power needs, the Elected Officials organization is meeting this week with the Climate Action Campaign (CAC). The Tempe Public Library project includes roof solar panels, carport canopies that provide 262 shaded parking spaces, and a large solar canopy that is used as a community gathering space for festivals, events, and farmers markets. It also offers solar protection panels for wheelchair access. Tempe’s library complex solar panels produce 1.3 million kWh of energy, which is equivalent to reducing carbon emissions by more than 900 metric tons and taking 190 vehicles off the road each year.
The library is an appropriate location for the press conference, as it demonstrates how solar is a natural fit for Arizona. But not so fast — a major $156,120,000 Solar-For-All grant was rescinded for Arizona, alongside other federally funded clean energy projects.
Thank the Trump Administration.
Tempe city leaders had established a 100% clean energy goal by 2035 and worked with the federal government to secure needed grant funding for some clean energy projects. “Sadly, that dynamic has changed,” said Christian Brock, Elected Officials to Protect America senior advisor and Air Force veteran.
As a clean and renewable power source fueling the library, solar has another plus: it costs less than a traditional power source. “Thousands have enjoyed the solar panel shaded outdoor gathering place for neighborhood events,” said Corey Woods, Tempe Mayor. “Every summer we are experiencing far too many dangerously hot days. We know with the added risk of extreme heat, utility bills skyrocket. Federal funding from the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program and the Weatherization Assistance Program have been critical to help Arizona residents who live on fixed incomes.”
“Every community across the state needs federal funding for clean energy initiatives, energy efficiencies, and climate protection,” the mayor added.
Is Solar For All A Pipe Dream?
The concern now is that Arizona will not be able to meet its clean energy goals, which will hurt families and businesses; marginalized communities may suffer the most. The Elected Officials group is advocating for the release of clean energy grant funding for more renewable energy projects in Arizona, like Solar for All.
The Tempe Solar for All award was part of the historic $27 billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund, developed under the Inflation Reduction Act to lower US families’ energy costs, create good-quality jobs in communities — including historically disadvantaged communities, advance environmental justice, and tackle the climate crisis. The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) provided over $369 billion in tax breaks, incentives, grants, and loan guarantees that were designed to mitigate the climate crisis, which impacts communities daily with weather extremes and poor air quality.
Just last month, the three largest utilities in Arizona saw record peak demands as residents cranked up the air conditioning during extreme heat. The Solar for All program’s planned 61 megawatts of solar would have helped meet the state’s growing demand and prevent outages while creating quality jobs. Without the Solar for All program, eligible Arizonans will lose out on an average of 20% in annual energy bill savings per participating household, $11 million to support workforce development programs, and new solar deployment.
The Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA) is navigating several other federal policy actions. On July 15, the Department of the Interior issued a memo stating that Interior Secretary Doug Burgum will need to personally sign off on numerous types of federal permitting approvals for a solar project to move forward. Additionally, the US Treasury issued new guidance on August 15 that made changes to the formal definition of “beginning of construction” for solar projects to earn federal tax credits.
Nonetheless, the US solar industry installed nearly 18 gigawatts (GW) of new capacity in the first half of 2025. Even as the Trump administration rolled out a series of anti-clean energy policies, solar and storage still accounted for 82% of all new power added to the grid in its first six months.
Loss Of Important Federal Agencies Hurts Renewable Uptick & Everyday Citizens
Elected officials and CAC say that challenges Arizonans face require a fully funded, fully staffed, and politically independent federal response. However, Trump 2.0 has vowed to end the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP), and the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP). His administration has stripped the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of its core mission.
Attacks on these agencies jeopardize clean air, safe water, and climate pollution limits that protect public health. The Elected Officials organization challenges the Trump administration, insisting that they failed to recognize the climate crisis as a threat multiplier in their 2025 threat assessment — despite previously acknowledging the danger during Trump’s first term.
Assistant Minority Leader, State Rep. Nancy Gutierrez, explained that, “it’s Arizona families who pay the price. The stress, polluted air, higher utility bills, and fewer outside local jobs are the result. On the other hand, clean energy investments save families money, bring cleaner air and can help mitigate weather extremes. We must do everything in our power to protect people from climate crisis dangers. Every dollar stripped away from clean-energy programs,” she continued, “is a dollar stolen from the prosperity, health, and security of families.”
Final Thoughts
The Elected Officials group — which represents 1313 officials in 50 states — argues that the need for energy security solutions has never been greater. Elected officials at all levels of government are joining together to educate their peers and communities on clean energy solutions that will protect people and the planet. The group helps facilitate those connections with educational opportunities, training, and gatherings at home and abroad. The Elected Officials organization educates lawmakers through value-based storytelling; it is the only national organization that mobilizes veterans who are lawmakers to work together on energy security solutions.
Their network includes elected officials at all levels of government in all states and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy