BYD Unveils 3rd-Generation Electric Bus Platform With 1000-Volt Architecture
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
BYD may be experiencing a bit of turmoil in its home market, as it has been aggressively cutting prices to increase its market share — a practice the Chinese government frowns upon — but it it not slowing down in its drive to bring new models to market and expand its exports. It is on the cusp of opening a manufacturing plant in Hungary and has a second moving forward in Turkey.
BYD is about more than passenger cars. It also builds a full range of electric commercial trucks that collect trash, haul freight, and serve local fire departments. BYD is also one of the largest manufacturers of electric buses in the world.
On September 15, 2025, BYD took the wraps off its third-generation electric bus platform. The most noticeable thing about the latest bus chassis is that it is based on 1000-volt architecture, a significant step forward from its current platform that is based on 800-volt architecture. Higher voltages primarily aid fast charging, but have other benefits as well. According to CnEVPost, the new platform can host almost 600 kWh of BYD’s proprietary LFP Blade batteries for long-range operation.
The new chassis makes use of a cell-to-chassis approach that integrates the Blade battery cells directly into the chassis between the axles, making the system “the industry’s thinnest bus-dedicated Blade Battery with the chassis frame.” The first bus to use the new e-Bus Platform 3.0 will be the company’s 11-meter-long BYD C11, which the company says can be fitted with up to 593 kWh of batteries.
According to CnEVPost, the “e-Bus Platform 3.0” mirrors the passenger car division, which is rolling out new models based on its third-generation “e-Platform 3.0.” According to Chinese media, BYD has transferred several technologies from its passenger cars into the bus segment, including the 1,000-volt architecture already introduced this year in the Tang EV and Han EV.
The company has also upgraded the platform in terms of efficiency, safety, and intelligence. CnEVPost reports the 1,000 volt system supplies the drivetrain, charging unit, power distribution, and air conditioning. The platform incorporates silicon carbide power electronics and a new 7-in-1 thermal management system.
The upgrades are designed to reduce overall energy consumption by up to 18 percent and increase range in low temperatures by 50 to 80 kilometers. Buses built on the new platform can be equipped with active suspension on either the front or rear axle or both, depending on customer needs.
The e-Bus Platform 3.0 also integrates BYD’s Driver Assistance System 2.0 and its intelligent torque control system (iTAC). New safety features include an emergency button on the dashboard, which brings the vehicle to a safe stop, and a stability control function that intervenes in case of tire blowouts while driving.
BYD has not yet released details on the electric motor or charging performance. However, it is know that the C11 can be equipped with 184 kWh, 257 kWh, 311 kWh, 425 kWh, or 593 kWh battery packs. In the Chinese test cycle, the C11 should be capable of driving between 220 and 730 kilometers. The company did say the C11 “boasts a range exceeding 400 kilometers under full load with air conditioning running.” BYD has not yet said when and where the C11 will launch, but it almost certainly will debut first in its home market in China.
McGill’s Adds 30 Yutong Electric Buses
McGill’s, a public transportation company in Scotland, has just added 30 twelve-meter-long electric buses manufactured by Yutong to its fleet. In a press release, the company said each bus can carry up to 70 passengers and comes with a 422 kWh battery pack plus air conditioning, USB charging ports, and noise reduction features.
The new electric buses will serve several Midland Bluebird routes throughout the Forth Valley, as well as on the 38 Falkirk-to-Stirling service which McGills states will be “fully transformed” with electric vehicles. Whether this means it will be solely operated using electric buses is not clear, but McGill’s has said it will increase frequency of the service up to every 15 minutes Monday–Saturday as a result.
The new purchase brings McGill’s total electric bus fleet up to 151 and will lead to a number of “significant” upgrades to its depot in Larbert, which is home to the company’s Midland Bluebird transit service.
Charging infrastructure at McGill’s Group is provided by Zenobē, which is leading the ScotZEB 2 consortium that will deploy over 250 zero-emission vehicles and create a network of shared charging infrastructure across Scotland. Zenobē’s financing approach provides efficient and effective delivery, which was a contributing factor in the acquisition of 30 new Yutong electric buses just one year after its program began.
Tony Williamson, CEO of McGill’s Group, told the press, “We’re excited to launch these cutting-edge electric buses on the busy Midland Bluebird 38 service linking Falkirk and Stirling, where passengers will soon benefit from an increased daytime frequency of every 15 minutes, Monday to Saturday, starting this week.
“With this investment, McGill’s continues to operate one of the UK’s largest electric bus fleets, reinforcing our leadership in the shift to zero-emission public transport across Scotland. This roll out reflects the vision of our owners, Sandy and James Easdale, whose ongoing commitment to sustainable travel is helping us deliver a greener network and a better experience for the communities we serve.”
125 of McGill’s fleet of 151 electric buses were manufactured by Yutong, and have been acquired through a series of large orders over the last few years. In May 2022, McGill’s ordered 41 more battery electric buses after its initial 35 in 2021. Ian Downie, the head of Yutong UK, said: “McGills were the very first Scottish operator to order our electric vehicles. This order will bring their total Yutong fleet to 125 single decks in operation. We have been delighted to maintain and grow our partnership over the past few years.”
The Electric Bus Phenomenon
Of the three main transportation categories — cars, trucks, and buses — the transition to battery operation in the bus sector is happening fastest. Why is that? Electric buses cost more to buy than conventional buses, so why are they so popular? That’s because the operating costs are so much lower, including savings in diesel fuel, repairs, and brake replacements. Those savings must more than offset the purchase premium.
Then there is the issue of customer satisfaction. Electric buses are far quieter than their diesel-powered cousins, and they don’t smell of diesel exhaust all the time. A year ago, I had a chance to ride a standard bus and an electric bus over the same route on Martha’s Vineyard. The difference was stark. The electric bus was smoother, quieter, and more comfortable than the regular bus.
Part of the task of transit operators is to get more people to use their services. People look forward to trips in an electric bus but not to the same trip in a conventional fossil-powered bus. If the goal is to boost ridership, electric is the obvious choice.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy