Why Electrifying Motorcycles In India Is Important
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
It was about a month ago that CleanTechnica published a press release about TDK investing in Ultraviolette to electrify more motorcycles. I reached out to get some extra details because India is a vast market for two-wheel vehicles and switching to clean, electric ones is better for reducing air pollution that is harmful to people and the environment. There are other electric vehicle benefits as well.
Ravi Jain, Investment Director at TDK Ventures, answered some questions for CleanTechnica.
Why is it important to electrify motorcycles in India?
Electrification of motorcycles is the key to decarbonization of 2W mobility in India, which represents over 70% of all mobility in India and accounts for 60% of gasoline consumption. Motorcycle sales are 2x the scooter sales in India. While scooters are seeing ~20% penetration of EV, motorcycles are at 0.1%. This implies that a very significant portion of 2W mobility remains untouched from electrifications. Startups tackling this problem can make a great impact.
How many gas motorcycles are there in India?
The number of motorcycles is approximately 250 M and is almost entirely petrol powered. Every year 20M new motorcycles are sold in India. Petrol’s share today is approximately 99.9%.
Are they common in Indian cities that also have harmful and unhealthy air pollution?
Yes, motorcycles are 2/3rd of all 2W and their usage is fairly uniformly distributed across India.
How many electric motorcycle models does Ultraviolette have?
Ultraviolette has 2 models which they are currently selling namely, the F77 Mach 2 and F77 Superstreet. They announced the launch and opened registrations of their first scooter product, Tesseract, and a adventure bike, named Shockwave. Over 70,000 pre-registrations have been received for these products and deliveries of these will commence in early 2026.
Do electric motorcycle riders charge mostly at home?
Yes, home charging is the most used method across 2W, including motorcycles.
Can they save money by charging with electricity instead of paying for gasoline?
Yes, the monthly savings on fuel are ~70% when consumers switch to electric.
What motivates gas motorcycle owners to switch to electric motorcycles?
There are 3 primary reasons: EV motorcycles offer better performance, better connectivity features and an overall lower cost of ownership. These are driving the switch from gas motorcycles to electric motorcycles.
What will Ultraviolette do with the new funds?
Launch more products across the 2W segments; b) Scale capacity to manufacture ~100,000 vehicles and c) increase distributions in India and EU.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy