Classic Aston Martin DB6 Converted To Electric Power
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
The Aston Martins are stylish, distinct vehicles to the point that some were featured in James Bond films. One site stated the Aston Martin company owner was so dedicated to producing the DB6 at a high standard he was losing money on every one sold. Today, if you want to buy a vintage DB6 it will cost a great sum, and to the person who has such wealth, owning one is worth it.
Recently, Electrogenic converted a DB6 owned by comedian Jimmy Carr to fully electric. Converting old internal combustion engine vehicles to all-electric eliminates toxic air pollution generated directly by the vehicle. It also means there are fewer old vehicles using fossil fuels, which are the primary contributor to climate change.
Steve Drummond, CEO at Electrogenic, answered some questions about the conversion for CleanTechnica.
How much of the original components of the Classic Aston Martin DB6 were kept intact?
All of them are intact! But we removed the engine, gearbox, exhaust system, and petrol tank. Nothing else. And the parts are carefully stored, so they are not gaining miles and preserve the value of the car.
What size electric motor was installed after the internal combustion engine was removed?
There are two options that we offer for the DB6, 200 bhp and 280 bhp. This car has the 200 bhp option.
What is the electric Aston Martin’s driving range?
The DB6 has 150+ miles of range in real world, mixed driving, with as much as 200 miles possible if driving in urban areas.
Is the electric version of the Aston Martin as quick or quicker than the gas-powered version?
The official factory figures were 0-60 mph in 6.2 seconds. The 200 bhp motor will deliver 0-60 mph in 6.5 seconds, and the 280 bhp motor can deliver 0-60 mph in 4.5 seconds. When driving, it feels quicker because there is always immediate torque available.
What EV chargers is it compatible with?
The car has 6.6 kW AC on-board charger and 100 kW CCS, so it can be charged both by a home AC wallbox, or a rapid charger when charging ‘on the go’.
What is the battery capacity and chemistry?
62 kWh, NMC (nickel manganese cobalt).
Where did you source the battery from?
We buy battery modules directly from automotive battery manufacturers and then engineer them into a battery system.
How long does it take to charge the battery fully?
About 45 minutes on CCS.
What is the battery weight?
The battery is distributed between the front and the rear of the car (where the fuel tank was), and totals 300 kg — so less in total than the original engine.
Is there a warranty for the EV drivetrain and battery?
Yes, two years for parts and labour.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy