XPENG Praises Hong Kong & Preps For Autonomous Driving Tests
Support CleanTechnica's work through a Substack subscription or on Stripe.
Hong Kong looks like it’s ready to get moving faster in the self-driving car market, and XPENG is right there at the doorstep ready to be part of it.
In an announcement a few moments ago, XPENG stated: “XPENG welcomes the policy measures put forward by the Chief Executive in the Policy Address to accelerate the unmanned and large-scale development of autonomous driving in Hong Kong and achieve commercial operation as soon as possible. XPENG will actively cooperate with the SAR Government and, leveraging its own technology and experience, promote the industry’s use of Hong Kong as a platform to explore overseas markets, especially right-hand drive markets, and jointly foster the sustainable development of Hong Kong.”
Hmm, the note about using Hong Kong as a testing center for other right-hand drive markets is an interesting side note. Overall, though, it’s clear XPENG was on top of things and ready to take up a leadership role in autonomous driving in Hong Kong. We’ll see what it leads to….
“The promotion of autonomous vehicles proposed in the Policy Address reflects Hong Kong’s vision and responsibility as an international innovation and technology hub. XPENG is willing to join hands with the Hong Kong SAR Government and all sectors of society to help Hong Kong build a future-oriented sustainable transportation system with world-leading smart driving technology,” He Xiaopeng, Chairman and CEO of XPENG, stated. The company also wrote:
“As an innovation leader in the field of smart EVs and autonomous driving technology, we will actively participate in Hong Kong’s autonomous driving testing and application process, supporting the construction of a smarter, safer, and greener urban transportation ecosystem in Hong Kong. […]
“XPENG will continue to pay close attention to and support the promotion and implementation of relevant policies, and looks forward to contributing technology and experience to the construction of Hong Kong’s smart city.”
Naturally, every stepping stone announcement and market in this realm is presumably leading to a massive, fast expansion of self-driving cars and robotaxis. Or, perhaps, the “revolution” just happens incrementally on this topic. One testing period at a time, one market opening up at a time, an incremental increase in self-driving taxi rollouts at a time. Perhaps it is not a revolution at all, but a gradual tech swap that more or less upgrades the taxi industry. In any case, Hong Kong is moving forward on this faster now, and XPENG is taking part in that.
Sign up for CleanTechnica's Weekly Substack for Zach and Scott's in-depth analyses and high level summaries, sign up for our daily newsletter, and follow us on Google News!
Have a tip for CleanTechnica? Want to advertise? Want to suggest a guest for our CleanTech Talk podcast? Contact us here.
Sign up for our daily newsletter for 15 new cleantech stories a day. Or sign up for our weekly one on top stories of the week if daily is too frequent.
CleanTechnica uses affiliate links. See our policy here.
CleanTechnica's Comment Policy