Prediction market protocol Myriad has passed $10 million in USDC trading volume with over half a million users, as it builds on its mission to make information itself a tradable asset class.
The protocol’s rapid expansion is “building the rails for prediction markets to evolve beyond a niche crypto product and become an entirely new segment of DeFi,” Loxley Fernandes, co-founder and CEO of Myriad, said in a statement shared with Decrypt.
“Financial markets have always been about speculation, but Myriad is turning speculation into a product,” Fernandes said, adding that Myriad’s success demonstrates that “trading ideas and forecasts is not only possible, it’s the next frontier for capital markets.”
Created by Decrypt and Rug Radio’s parent company DASTAN, Myriad launched its USDC markets in March 2025. In July, Myriad expanded to Ethereum Layer-2 network Linea, marking a key stage in its evolution into a multichain prediction markets protocol designed to power a “new class of DeFi products.”
To date, Myriad users have installed its browser extension over 60,000 times and made more than 5.4 million predictions across categories including sport, politics, culture and crypto—taking in everything from Nvidia’s market cap to how many birds would fly over Texas on a given night.
Myriad continues to develop both its consumer platform and a B2B protocol for other prediction applications. Its future roadmap includes integrations with EigenLayer and EigenCloud, as well as plans for introducing blended oracles and a framework for ERC-PRED, a new asset class designed for prediction markets.
With prediction markets expected to surpass the stock market in the next decade and a half, Myriad is preparing to make prediction markets a pillar of global DeFi. Ultimately, its aim is to do for financial derivatives and predictions what Robinhood did for stocks and securities, Fernandes said—building a protocol that enables users to “tokenize your opinions with just three taps of your finger.”