Fans have been eagerly awaiting the arrival of the new entry in their favorite franchise for years, and it's finally here.
With Grand Theft Auto delayed into next year, that can only mean one thing: Hollow Knight: Silksong is coming, and it's coming in just a few days.
For those who have been patient, this news is almost unbelievable. Developer Team Cherry has been nearly silent since the game's announcement, to the point where entire communities of memes have emerged, with some focusing on trolling each other.
This month also marks the long-awaited return of Silent Hill. That is to say, trailers so far have been tantalizing, but it's up to Konami to make good on the promises and create a game that feels authentically 'Silent Hill.'
While the games below are the ones we think are the most exciting releases coming next month, make no mistake, there are tons of intriguing games releasing.
We really wanted to include Garfield Kart 2: All You Can Drift, but unfortunately, we couldn't make it work.
Hollow Knight: Silksong
Release Date: September 4
Platforms: PC (Steam, GOG, Humble Bundle), macOS, Linux, Nintendo Switch, Nintendo Switch 2, PS4, PS5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X/S; Xbox Game Pass Day-One
Hollow Knight was an almost instant hit with gamers, especially fans of search-action games, colloquially called Metroidvanias.
Hollow Knight combines unique characters with razor-sharp precision gameplay and satisfying exploration.
Silksong is the sequel to that game, and in this one, you'll take on the role of the hunter Hornet, exploring a new map filled with secrets and bosses.
Baby Steps
Release Date: September 23 (delayed from Sept 8)
Platforms: PC (Steam), PS5
What a rare thing it is for a game genre to be named after a single person.
But Bennett Foddy hit a nerve with the 2008 browser game QWOP, which used the q, w, o, and p keys to move the character's feet with excruciating precision or risk falling face-first.
Most video games are power fantasies--you can unleash a hail of bullets or a meteor storm with the press of a button. Foddylikes keep their tasks much simpler and more straightforward.
That brings us to Baby Steps, in which you'll "play as Nate, an unemployed failson with nothing going for him, until one day he discovers a power he never knew he had… putting one foot in front of the other." The team behind Baby Steps is calling it a “literal walking simulator.”
Borderlands 4
Release Date: September 12 (PC, PS5, Xbox Series X/S); Nintendo Switch 2 on October 3
Platforms: PC (Steam, Epic Games Store), PS5, Xbox Series X/S, Nintendo Switch 2 (later)
Fear not, Borderlands fans, that dismal movie that came out last year didn't mark the death of the beloved shooter franchise. Borderlands 4 comes out in just a few weeks.
This game brings new characters and a new story, of course. But it's also adding an outpost takeover mechanic to the game, as well as the ability to pilot a Digirunner around the world map.
Like just about everything else in Borderlands, you can customize both the look and feel of the vehicle. Speaking of customization, Borderlands 4 also features a host of new weapons and new ways to mix and match parts of different brands to make ever more powerful guns.
Henry Halfhead
Release Date: September 16, 2025
Platforms: PC (Steam, Epic Games Store), PS5, Nintendo Switch (compatible with Switch 2)
Henry Halfhead takes inspiration from games like Katamari Damacy to create a simple, beautiful world.
And in that world, you play as, you guessed it, Henry Halfhead, a guy who is a pair of eyes and ears, a nose, and little else.
Henry, however, has the power to inhabit anything he can land on, and can then move around or perform item-specific actions, such as assuming a kitchen knife to chop food, for example.
This game looks whimsical and surprising, and we're eager to see just how many items you can possess.
Dying Light: The Beast
Release Date: September 19, 2025 (PS4 & Xbox One versions later in 2025)
Platforms: PC (Steam, Epic Games Store), PS5 (incl. Pro), Xbox Series X/S (initial); PS4, Xbox One (later)
We were all thinking the same thing when we played Dying Light 2, the expansive sequel to Dying Light. "I miss Dying Light protagonist Kyle Crane, a character I definitely remember," we all said.
Dying Light: The Beast puts it back in the parkour sneakers of Kyle Crane, but something's different. It's been over a decade since we last saw him, and he's spent that entire time being held captive and used as a test subject by an evil scientist, who has given him newfound powers and senses.
Kyle can go berserk with his new abilities, but is he the titular Beast?
Silent Hill f
Release Date: September 25
Platforms: PC (Steam, Epic Games Store), PS5, Xbox Series X/S
Silent Hill fans have had a rough go of it.
After a great start in the late 1990s and early 2000s with a string of solid-to-excellent survival horror games, Konami struggled to produce a Silent Hill game that lived up to the critical and fan acclaim of Silent Hill 2.
It's not that every game since has been bad, but they've definitely struggled to make a mark.
The trailers for Silent Hill f show the game shifting from modern American streets to 1960s Japan. This is a wholly new setting that makes this a fresh start, more than a sequel or reboot.
The monsters we've seen look awesome, but the trailers seem to suggest a focus on melee combat—something that's never been a strength for the series. Fans are crossing their fingers that this one lands.
Final Fantasy Tactics: The Ivalice Chronicles
Release Date: September 30
Platforms: PC (Steam), PS4, PS5, Xbox Series X/S, Nintendo Switch, Nintendo Switch 2
While most of the memorable Final Fantasy games are the mainline numbered entries, Final Fantasy Tactics, first released for the original PlayStation (Tactics on Game Boy Advance SP was my preferred version), stands out as perhaps the best-loved spinoff game in the Final Fantasy franchise.
Instead of exploring a vast open world with a few characters, you're in charge of a small army of wizards, warriors, and more, fighting enemies on grid-based battlefields.
The story doesn't skimp either, dealing with themes of power and corruption. This release introduces an updated script with fully voiced dialogue, "improved" art (although they've made this claim before and failed to live up to it), a revamped UI, new difficulty levels, and auto-save.
This could be the best way to play one of Square Enix's best games.